README.md, before:

# claude-image-renamer

AI-powered image renaming script that generates descriptive filenames for screenshots. Uses OCR text extraction combined with Claude's vision capabilities to analyze image content and rename files to a searchable, lowercase, underscore-separated format.

## Features

- Automatically sanitizes macOS screenshot filenames containing special Unicode characters
- Extracts text from images via OCR to improve rename accuracy
- Uses Claude AI to analyze both the image and extracted text
- Generates clean, descriptive filenames (max 64 characters, lowercase with underscores)
- Handles naming conflicts by automatically appending numeric suffixes (`_1`, `_2`, etc.)
- Supports batch processing of multiple images in a single invocation

## AI Disclaimer

The code in this repository was developed with the assistance of the Claude Opus 4.5 LLM model by Anthropic.

## Requirements

- [Claude Code CLI](https://code.claude.com/docs/en/overview) (`claude`)
- `ocr` binary (optional, macOS only)

## Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jftuga/claude-image-renamer.git
cd claude-image-renamer
chmod 755 claude-image-renamer.sh
```

To build the optional OCR tool (macOS only):
* This compiles `ocr.swift` using the macOS Vision framework. The script will function without the `ocr` binary, but providing OCR text improves Claude's ability to generate accurate filenames.

```bash
make
```

## Usage

```bash
# Single file
./claude-image-renamer.sh "Screenshot 2025-12-29 at 10.03.10 PM.png"
# Renames to something like: vscode_python_debug_settings.png

# Multiple files
./claude-image-renamer.sh image1.png image2.png image3.png

# Using shell globbing
./claude-image-renamer.sh *.png
./claude-image-renamer.sh Screenshots/*.png
```

When processing multiple files, the script displays progress for each file and prints a summary upon completion showing how many files were processed successfully.

## How It Works

1. Sanitizes macOS screenshot filenames that contain narrow no-break space characters (U+202F)
2. Generates OCR text extraction from the image (or uses existing `.ocr.txt` file if present)
3. Sends both the OCR content and image to Claude for analysis
4. Claude analyzes the image, checks for naming conflicts, and renames the file to a descriptive format using `mv`

When multiple files are provided, each file is processed sequentially through the above workflow.
Files that fail validation (e.g., not found) are skipped, allowing the remaining files to be processed.

## Acknowledgements

A few ideas in this script were derived from [ai-screenshot-namer](https://github.com/cpbotha/ai-screenshot-namer)

Commit message:

add 'macOS Folder Actions' section

README.md, after:

# claude-image-renamer

AI-powered image renaming script that generates descriptive filenames for screenshots. Uses OCR text extraction combined with Claude's vision capabilities to analyze image content and rename files to a searchable, lowercase, underscore-separated format.

## Features

- Automatically sanitizes macOS screenshot filenames containing special Unicode characters
- Extracts text from images via OCR to improve rename accuracy
- Uses Claude AI to analyze both the image and extracted text
- Generates clean, descriptive filenames (max 64 characters, lowercase with underscores)
- Handles naming conflicts by automatically appending numeric suffixes (`_1`, `_2`, etc.)
- Supports batch processing of multiple images in a single invocation

## AI Disclaimer

The code in this repository was developed with the assistance of the Claude Opus 4.5 LLM model by Anthropic.

## Requirements

- [Claude Code CLI](https://code.claude.com/docs/en/overview) (`claude`)
- `ocr` binary (optional, macOS only)

## Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jftuga/claude-image-renamer.git
cd claude-image-renamer
chmod 755 claude-image-renamer.sh
```

To build the optional OCR tool (macOS only):
* This compiles `ocr.swift` using the macOS Vision framework. The script will function without the `ocr` binary, but providing OCR text improves Claude's ability to generate accurate filenames.

```bash
make
```

## Usage

```bash
# Single file
./claude-image-renamer.sh "Screenshot 2025-12-29 at 10.03.10 PM.png"
# Renames to something like: vscode_python_debug_settings.png

# Multiple files
./claude-image-renamer.sh image1.png image2.png image3.png

# Using shell globbing
./claude-image-renamer.sh *.png
./claude-image-renamer.sh Screenshots/*.png
```

When processing multiple files, the script displays progress for each file and prints a summary upon completion showing how many files were processed successfully.

## How It Works

1. Sanitizes macOS screenshot filenames that contain narrow no-break space characters (U+202F)
2. Generates OCR text extraction from the image (or uses existing `.ocr.txt` file if present)
3. Sends both the OCR content and image to Claude for analysis
4. Claude analyzes the image, checks for naming conflicts, and renames the file to a descriptive format using `mv`

When multiple files are provided, each file is processed sequentially through the above workflow.
Files that fail validation (e.g., not found) are skipped, allowing the remaining files to be processed.

## macOS Folder Actions

For fully automated screenshot renaming, you can configure this tool as a macOS `Folder Action`.
Once set up, any screenshot saved to your Desktop (or another watched folder) will be automatically
renamed without manual intervention.

See [folder_actions_setup/README.md](folder_actions_setup/README.md) for installation and configuration instructions.

## Acknowledgements

A few ideas in this script were derived from [ai-screenshot-namer](https://github.com/cpbotha/ai-screenshot-namer)
